more than 100 days into the war on Gaza
the Israeli media space is reeling over
the implications of the court case in
the hag and the role journalists have
played in a war of Vengeance a broadcast
network in Australia has been accused of
caving in to the pro-israel lobby and
firing one of its journalists plus
Finland tries to fortify future
Generations against misinformation fake
[Music]
news
since South Africa brought its genocide
case against Israel to the international
court of justice last week the reaction
from the Israeli news media has been
incredulous some pundits have been
mocking the case others have criticized
Israeli officials not for the Mass
Slaughter in Gaza but for their cander
including some blood curdling statements
that South Africa has offered as proof
of genocidal intent the Israeli
government is taking the prospect of
losing losing this case seriously prime
minister Netanyahu says he will not
allow an icj ruling or anything else to
stop the bombing of Gaza since October
7th more than 24,000 Palestinians have
been killed and according to gaza's
health Ministry at least 10,000 children
hundreds of thousands more are now going
hungry staring a famine in the face
should the icj's ruling go against
Israel the implications will extend well
beyond the Middle East all the way to
the US where Israel's lead sponsor will
be expected to honor its obligations
under the genocide
[Music]
convention Israel's war on Gaza is more
than 100 days old and two days after the
court hearings in the ha Benjamin
Netanyahu was at his most
[Music]
defiant
read between the lines though and that
doesn't sound like a prime minister who
thinks the international Court of
justices ruling is going to go Israel's
way his statement following the the
hearing was for the Israeli audience to
say that the war is not over and
especially because of right-wing
pressure from the extremists in netan
government that are unsatisfied that
they're moving to maybe the final stage
of the war it was also aimed in
significant part at the Palestinians if
you think think that anyone has the
power to stop us raining down high
explosives on the Gaza
Strip think again because we issue the
orders and no one will be able to assist
you and very much to the International
Community you know don't think of
stopping us Nan said the opposite two
days before he said that Israel does not
have an intention to stay forever in
Gaza Israel has no intention of
permanently occupying Gaza or display
replacing its civilian population so it
was a combination of being mixed up
embarrassed and not knowing exactly what
to do with the political system and the
media they were all shocked from this
whole procedure because it came so
rapidly out of the blue sky Israel is
used to long long processes which never
even start not to say never end and here
all of a sudden Israel faced a a situ
which she never faced
before much of the information War
Israel's been fighting since October 7th
has been based in its news Studios
journalists in those Studios then
covered the icj hearings live in this
case alongside the deputy speaker of the
knesset whose name came up at the
hearings as evidence of Israeli
officials speaking with genocidal intent
during the icj hearing on Channel first
one of the guest was Parliament member
Nissim vaturi who said that all Gaza
should be burned down and this statement
was quoted in the icj and the host asked
him about the damage it
caused and he started to talk about what
happened on October 7 kind of preaching
to them about the horrific attacks
against Israel
and the host told him that we already
reported that we're asking you something
else and when he
continued they asked him to
leave that kind of push back is highly
unusual Israelis haven't seen much of it
on their news channels in fact some of
the genocidal statements raised at the
icj were originally delivered from those
news
Studios not just by politicians or
commentators some of it came straight
from the anchor
[Music]
chair
journalists have been Among The
prominent Israelis driving the
propaganda they are in no position now
to point the finger in a blame game from
the Israeli media there are basically
two themes uh the First theme is outrage
along the lines of how dare they um we
the ones who are the victims of uh
genocide
here not only during the
1940s but also on October 7th so how
dare they accuse us of genocide we're
only defending ourselves and the second
one is basically a standing ovation for
what is um uh presented as the
phenomenal job Israel's legal team did
in rebutting South
Africa how did we get to this we after
three months of war in Gaza in which the
Israeli media almost all of them totally
betrayed its professional Mission you
don't see the people of Gaza you don't
see the starvation you don't see the
dying children on on flaws of hospitals
the bombarding you just see vague images
so Israelis came to this session of the
court with a feeling that everything
went right right in the
war outside of Israel media Watchers
criticize the UK's most watched news
channels BBC and sky for failing to
provide live coverage of the first day
of the hearings when South Africa made
its case only to carry parts of Israel's
defense the following day some British
interviewers had already been pushing
back against Israeli talking points once
the hearings wrapped up armed with the
evidence South Africa had just dropped
on the icj they appeared to turn the
screws even tighter on Israeli officials
I think it is tragic and appalling that
South Africa has decided to play
advocate for the devil and serve as the
legal arm of I'm going to pause you
there if I may Mr Levy because almost
every point I put to you or every
question I ask you you respond with an
answer that is not relevant to the
question unaccustomed to tough questions
from Western news outlets some of the
exchanges left this Israeli spin doctor
squirming say you're going off you kill
civilians this is what CH I wish
we agression of war is awful it's
difficult for me to comment on you know
exactly what kind of motivates
journalists to ask the questions that
they ask but the icj case is providing
foundation for journalists to consider
that the allegations that Israel is
committing very serious violations of
international law have more credibility
now that a a third state South Africa
has decided to bring this
case the icj's judges are expected to
issue their ruling by early February if
not sooner the American position on this
case has not changed at least publicly
as its officials keep saying the
submission against Israel to the
international court of justice distracts
the world and moreover the charge of
genocide is meritless reports like this
one however quoting us officials say
otherwise that President Biden is
running out of patience for president
Netanyahu polls indicate that Biden's
backing of Israel's war on Gaza in an
election year will cost him votes
particularly among Young Americans as
one former Israeli political adviser has
suggested if Joe Biden is looking for a
way out of this the icj case could
provide him with one
could this be the ladder that helps
America walk itself to a different
position where we finally shift towards
a ceasefire the smart thing for an us
Administration if it wants to see an end
to this would be to say we didn't go to
the
icj but we have to respect the
seriousness of these hearings assuming
there is some kind of finding that is
problematic for Israel's current
campaign that that offers us a way
forward so it could play that role if
the court orders provisional measures it
will mean that there is at least a
plausible case that Israel is carrying
out genocidal acts in Gaza and one would
hope that journalists would reflect that
fact in their reporting that it might
shift the debate to an extent on
Israel's military operation in Gaza and
lend more Credence really to the notion
that Israel's committing genocide these
formal accusations of genocide at the
highest court on the Globe May well turn
out to be a turning point a very long
overdue turning point but a turning
point nonetheless this conflict has cost
more journalists their lives than any
other conflict can you imagine if the
same number of
Ukrainian or British
journalists had been killed or Israeli
journalists killed by
Palestinians nuclear weapons would have
been deployed against the Gaza Strip as
the saying goes Palestinians are indeed
children of a Lesser
God the pro-israel lobby has Global
reach as employees at Australia's public
broadcaster ABC might tell you after the
firing of a journalist there for sharing
a story about Gaza on social media minak
shiravi is here with more Richard a
month ago a host at ABC's Sydney morning
radio program Australian Lebanese
journalist antoanet latf was sacked the
official reason latf had reposted a
Human Rights Watch report stating Israel
was using starvation as a weapon of War
however an investigation by the Sydney
Morning Herald alleges she was let go
because of something else entirely
something quite nefarious the paper
obtained dozens of leaked messages from
a WhatsApp group called lawyers for
Israel whose members wrote to ABC
calling for latf to be sacked and
threatening legal action if she wasn't
screenshots from the group show a
coordinated letter writing campaign in
an email sent to All staff at ABC
managing director David Anderson
rejected any claim that it was
influenced by any external pressure
whether it be an advocacy or Lobby group
a political party or a commercial entity
latf called her dismissal unlawful and
took ABC to court her lawyer tweeted
that the sacking was based on both
political opinion and race the case
which looked at whether the Broadcasting
Company acted under the influence of
external lobbying failed to be settled
at a legal hearing this past Thursday
the matter didn't resolve today um but
the Fight Continues and I'm willing and
prepared to fight for as long as it
takes this is such an important case
because it's not just about me it's
about Free Speech lat's case is not the
first of its kind many journalists
particularly in the anglosphere have
lost their jobs or been suspended since
October 7th for their views on the Gaza
War thanks Mina social media the ability
of people to broadcast their own stories
has shown its importance once again
during Israel's war on Gaza but online
platforms can also be Hotspots for fake
news one country that stresses the
importance of training young people to
distinguish fact from fiction is Finland
the fins got a head start on this for
more than half a century they had to
contend with Soviet propaganda coming
over their eastern border these days the
misinformation comes from all directions
and is mostly digital so the Finnish
government has woven courses on media
literacy into its school curriculums to
equip fins with the tools to assess the
accuracy of the information they see
teachers are on the front lines of this
fight for truth and the national
broadcaster also has its part to play
the listening posts Flo Phillips now on
a societal wide educational drive that
offers a model for educators
broadcasters and countries around the
world a grinning purple cat a bouncing
yellow sun a classic combination for any
animators out to attract the attention
of small children huh but this video
produced by finland's National
audiovisual Institute has an important
message about the media the kids are
consuming it's been designed to help
pre-primary school children work out
what's real and what's not and what can
be done if they're left scared or
confused by what they're seeing that's
because in Finland no one is too young
to start thinking about the reliability
of the information they encounter the
approach that we are promoting is that
that you have to start uh with very
young children uh before the school age
and and you start with with basic
elements of of media and understanding
of what media is about and then you
build the understanding that there's
always someone behind each picture and
each story and the the the older the
children get the deeper you go into
these different parts of media and and
content creation and
production media literacy is not one
single subject it's Tor across all
subjects for example in Finish language
lure we teach the basic skills we talk
about fake news source analysis media
criticism then in maths we might focus
on statistics and
algorithms in art classes students learn
about images how photos are edited in
history class we discussed an air raid
that took place during the second world
war and thought about how the same
incident could be taught differently
depending which side the country had
fought on it's very important that we
don't just teach the subject matter but
also the analytical skills who produced
it and for what
purpose spotting fake news is a very
real part of daily education here in
filant sometimes it's subtly woven into
everyday subjects sometimes it's more
specific we're about to sit in on a
class where 14-year-olds are learning
all about MCE and Mal information
questioning and challenging claims like
the moon is made of cheese
for
the students are very good at
recognizing fake news for example when
news about the war in Ukraine started
appearing online fins in general have a
very high standard of media literacy
we're not easily
fooled that's in part because media
literacy Is Not A New Concept for Fins
it's been part of the culture for more
than a century ever since the Nordic
Nation first gained independence from
Russia in
1917 almost 100 years on having woed
itself off from years of Soviet
propaganda the fight against fake news
is still being fought first in the
aftermath of Russia's 2014 annexation of
Crimea and more recently with Putin's
invasion of Ukraine in particular
concerns about narratives challenging
finland's ambition to join NATO and
media literacy is now mandatory a core
component of the national curriculum
teaching Finnish students to form a
front line of defense against any
disinformation including content
infiltrating the 830m long border the
two countries still
share During the period of
finlandization in the Cold War The
Finnish media were very cautious about
their neighbor the Soviet Union people
always had to ask themselves whether the
news was really true of course there
have been changes since Russia has taken
on an increasingly aggressive Global
role we're also spending an increasingly
significant part of our lives on social
media so teaching media literacy and
criticism in schools is so
important we were one of the first
countries in in EU uh probably in the
world to actually have a specific policy
for media literacy there's no one single
right way to promote media literacy
there are multiple ways and and
different organizations can do the work
from their own viewpoints that way we
feel that we can reach much more people
than than we would be able to do if it
was all done only by us uh a
governmental office uh producing only
only materials by the government and and
telling like official story there's no
escaping the multifaceted media
education effort underway so many
different organizations are developing
and delivering learning programs from
schools universities and libraries to
government departments and NGS and one
of the biggest players is the public
broadcaster
Wy Mar V is one of we's media producers
she works on a number of the news
Network's teaching tools including a
project called news class we have 14
different news mentors working from
around Finland they go and meet the
class they tell them who they are and
then they go through like how news come
about like what do you see on the TV how
does that happen and once you go through
the whole process they they actually
start thinking about these publication
meth methods and that is really the way
fake news can be detected then of course
does a lot of other other things we have
Wy learning which does different types
of video on media education like the
light
detector
F the Deep fake videos we produced have
been really popular and the reason why
we put them out was that artificial
intelligence is coming at a speed where
we need
to kind of let people know that it
exists and how it works we also offer uh
different types of games that you can
immerse yourself into and and think of
uh what it would be like to be for
instance a
troll trolls foxes dogs there's a whole
managerie of characters being deployed
by game designers and developers to draw
kids in it's the more entertaining side
of the educational toolkit but that
doesn't mean it's all just fun and
games troll Factory is where you put
yourself in the position of a troll and
deliberately create as much harmful
material as possible for online
distribution it's quite an unpleasant
game but students experience the harm of
spreading
misinformation which is perhaps a good
thing for
them
while newslab uh produced troll Factory
uh when Russian trolls were really on
the news here in in Finland it really
makes you think like I do not want to be
the Lord of of Lies which is the end
result when you think of kids who are
Gamers if for some reason we manage to
incorporate one media education game
into this set of of gaming it's only a
bonus playing to student strengths the
media literacy program is a point of
Pride one of the many International
indexes where this small Nordic Nation
consistently comes out on top having
spent the last century schooling its
citizens to fend off fake news Finland
is Shifting its focus guarding against
new trends Technologies and platforms to
ensure that every pupil is prepared to
fight false information whatever form it
might
take in closing more than a 100 days
into the war on Gaza with nearly 120
journalists killed we are reminded of
the devastating cost to our colleagues
on the ground W El ddu has been
described as a mountain of Journalism
based in Gaza for Al jazer Arabic he has
kept on reporting even after he lost his
wife son daughter and a grandson to an
Israeli strike in October even after he
helped lay to arrest his colleague
cameraman Samar Abu Daka after an
Israeli attack in December that also o
left daku wounded and even after the
killing of his eldest son and fellow
journalist Hamza in the early days of
20024 w El dhu has now left Gaza to get
the medical attention his wounds require
but he says he'll be back we just wanted
to close by acknowledging the many
journalists still on the ground still
bringing you the news on this story
under the most dangerous circumstances
imaginable we'll see you next time here
at the listening
post